Woohoo it's finally time to learn our very first data structure and one that most likely you're very
familiar with arrays arrays which are sometimes called Liszt's organizes items sequentially.
That means one after another in memory.
Kind of like we have here we have some sort of data at index 0 let's say juice and then right after
index 1 we have something else.
Maybe Apple maybe this is a grocery list in our computers memory it will be one after another because
remember our RAM is a lot bigger than just seven slots.
And the arrays are probably the simplest and most widely used data structures.
And luckily for us we're starting with this because arrays have the least amount of rules and because
they're stored in contiguous memory that is in order.
They also have the smallest footprint of any data structure.
So if all you need is to store some data and iterate over it that is go one by one step by step.
Arrays are the best choice especially if you know the indices that is here on the left of the items
you are storing and just as a quick glance and we'll go over this in more detail in later videos.
But look up or access with erase our Constantine of one.
It's super super fast.
Other actions or methods that we're going to go over so just push are also fast.
But then inserts and deletes are O of N or linear time.
But in order to demonstrate arrays Let's actually use code to show you an example.
We have our little playground over here.
And again you can use whichever language you prefer.
I'm just going to demonstrate this in javascript.
We can create a simple array.
Let's call it strings and this array.
Again using the square brackets notation will have a then B then C and D.
And we just we've just created an array in javascript.
Now looking at this and based on what we've learned so far we can make a couple of assumptions.
For example to store the letter a letter B letter C letter D.
That's one two three four four items.
If we where on a 32 bit system that is we have 1 2 3 4 shelfs to store the letter A in zeros and ones.
Well if that's the case we just moved by four times for so four items and each item taking up four shelfs
in our memory.
That means that we're using up 20 or 16 bytes of storage if we remember in our little example here that
with a 32 bit system we have 1 2 3 4 shelfs to store this this number again.
This is a bit of a simplified version of looking at it but I hope you see what we're doing here we're
simply storing a b c d in sequential order in our ram our Random Access Memory.
So the computer now knows where to find these items.
Therefore when I do strings to I'm telling the computer hey go to the array called strength's you should
know where that is.
Because underneath the hood you stored it for me and grab the third item.
Remember the indexes are 0 1 2.
So grab the third item from where the array is stored on your memory.
And if I run this I'll get see the computer is going to grab that information for me because here it's
stored it for me.
And here it's grabbing it for me.
All right so let's do a few more operations with arrays and see what the pros and cons are.
Well in javascript we have a few methods that we can use with the race.
One is Polish which simply allows us to add something at the end of the array.
So strings dot push the.
And if we just remove this and let's have a console Daut log of strength's.
If I run this I get a B C D E this string push operation because it just adds it at the end of the array.
Is an 0 1 operation.
All we're doing is adding whatever item we want at the end.
We're not looping through anything.
So hopefully that makes sense why that would be one that's very convenient.
What's another method that we get.
We can also use pop and pop is the opposite of push pop will simply mean to remove the last item from
the strings from the array.
If I click run here you see that the e-mail was moved.
If I do strings doth pop again and hit Ron we see that this time around we've added He then we removed
the.
And then finally did to be left with a B and C.
What do you think the time complexity of this operation is.
Once again it's 0 0 1 because we're not looping through anything.
We're just removing the last item I remember.
Our computer knows where last item is stored.
We're simply saying go to index of let's say 7.
The very last item and remove the bread.
Let's do something interesting here now.
What if we want to add an item at the beginning of the array.
Maybe in here we want to add the letter x Well we have something called on shift in javascript and depending
on your language you will have perhaps something different.
But the idea here is we simply do strings dot on shift.
And by the way you see here how REPL that I-T actually gives you the parameters that you can enter.
In this case it just says what items.
Which is a string.
Should I enter.
In our case I'll say I want to shift x which is saying just add X at the beginning of the array.
If I click run here we see that x has been added at the beginning of our rary.
What do you think the time complexity of this operation is.
And by the way as we go through data structures and because we know Big-O notation is in it pretty cool
that we're able to think about code beyond just oh I'm just doing this we can think deeply about what's
happening underneath the hood.
Why might this operation be longer than this operation.
I find that fascinating and when I first understood this point it really made me a better engineer and
I hope you're starting to get this aha moment for you as well especially if this is your first time
with data structures.
Now on shift what are we doing here.
Well remember strings are essentially stored if I moved this to a new line the computer knows that this
is a zero.
This is that index of 1.
This is an index of two and this is at index of three when I add X with the shift I'm all of a sudden
adding X into our array.
But we now have to shift these numbers because the indexes are still like this.
But this time around we have to say OK 0 is now 8 x A is now 1 B is now 2 and C is that index 3 and
D is that index for.
And just by me doing this you might have seen something we just iterated loop through everything and
reassigned the indexes and I did one two three four five moves or five operations to realign the indexes
and this should give you a hint that is this operation is 0 of and depending on the size of the array
that's how long it's going to take to do that operation we're looping.
So right away we know that with the raise maybe it's not the best data structure for adding items at
the beginning of the array.
What if we wanted to add something in the middle of the array so we can use the method splice here.
Let me scroll down a bit and with splice I can say strings dot splice and again I get a hint of what
I can do.
The first is the start number.
So I want to start an index of 2.
I remember we have this array here.
X A B C.
So we're starting at B and the second parameter is the delete count.
What do we want to delete or how many things from this index do we want to delete.
In our case we don't want to delete anything we want to add.
So I'll say zero.
And then the items that we want to add.
So let's just add a string that says alien and let's remove this X from our original array.
That's better.
Let's hit Brian and there we go.
We have X because we've shifted a then alien b c so splice told us go to index of 2 0 1 2 where B was
initially and add alien instead of B and just shift things over.
So what we've done here is if we go back to our example we have the X in our array.
And we shifted these indexes of X and they are still the same but we shifted B over and said and here
I want to add Ilian
and we now had to go over everything and say 3:58 alien.
We want three forby four for C and five for D.
So what's our big o here.
And we don't need this come well our big O in this case we did.
Half of the operations because we changed half the array we loop through half the array.
So it would be 0 of and divided by two.
But remember our rules when it comes to big-O we remove constants and simplify to just call then.
Worst case it's going to be of an operation.
All right I'm going to leave this for you.
It can play around and try different methods on a race but I hope you understand how they work and how
there are some good things that we can do such as accessing the array that is of one.
Because it's well shrimpy fast we know exactly where it is in memory and we can push and pop.
But when it comes to shifting or splicing or even deleting because with splice we can even do deletes.
That's going to be our event.
And if we go back to our chart which we now have a better understanding of why arrays look ups are extremely
fast.
We know where they are.
We know why push padding at the end of the array is extremely fast but why inserting and deleting might
not be the best or the fastest when it comes to race.
But here's the thing.
There's actually two types of arrays and in the next video we're going to talk about these two types
I'll see in that one Bebai.